't
'\" <<ital-is-var>>
'\" <<bold-is-fixed>>
.TH GO-GMA-SERVER 6 "GMA Toolkit 4.2.2" 16-Nov-2020 "Games" \" @@mp@@
.SH NAME
go-gma-server \- GMA battle grid map server
.SH SYNOPSIS
'\" <<usage>>
.na
.B go\-gma\-server
.RB [ \-h ]
.ad
.LP
.na
.B go\-gma\-server
.RB [ \-help ]
.ad
.LP
.na
.B go\-gma\-server
.RB [ \-init\-file
.IR path ]
.RB [ \-log\-file
.IR path ]
'\" .RB [ \-mysql
'\" .IR database ]
.RB [ \-password\-file
.IR pass-file ]
.RB [ \-endpoint
.RI [ host ]\fB:\fP port ]
.RB [ \-save\-interval
.IR interval ]
.RB [ \-sqlite
.IR path ]
.ad
'\" <</usage>>
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
The individual
.BR mapper (6)
clients used by players in a game may keep in contact with one another so that they all
display the same contents. A change made on one client (moving a creature token or
adding a room, say) appears on all the others. This is accomplished by starting a
.B go\-gma\-server
process and having all of the 
.B mapper 
clients connect to it via their 
.B \-\-host
and 
.B \-\-port 
options.
.LP
Once connected, the
server
will send an initial greeting that may define a list of player character tokens
to appear on the 
.B mapper
context menus, or any other useful information the clients need to have
at startup time. It may, at the GM's option, even initialize the client to
show the full current game state.
.LP
From that point forward, the server
is a simple echo relay between the clients, so they communicate with each
other via the service. The server also tracks the commands it sees, so that it maintains
a notion of the current state of the game. Clients may re-sync with the server in case
they restart or otherwise miss any updates so they match the server's state.  The server
may respond directly to some client queries
(e.g., 
.RB \*(lq AI? \*(rq)
if it knows the answer rather than referring the query to the other clients.
.LP
To guard against nuisance or malicious port scans and other superfluous connections
which don't proceed with the normal activity, the server will automatically drop
any clients which don't authenticate within a few poll intervals. (In actual production
use, we have observed some automated agents which connected and then sat idle for hours,
consuming server resources.)
.LP
This is a re-implementation from scratch of the GMA server in the Go programming language.
The original Python implementation is documented in
.BR mapservice (6).
.SH OPTIONS
.LP
The following options control the behavior of
.BR go\-gma\-server .
'\" <<list>>
.TP
.BR \-h , \-help
Print a usage summary and exit.
.TP
.BI "\-init\-file " init-file
Each command in
.I init-file
will be sent to each client upon connection to the server.
The lines of this file must therefore be valid mapper protocol commands as documented in
.BR mapper (6).
The JSON data portion of each command may span multiple lines. In
this case, all lines after the first must be indented. The final closing brace
may appear unindented on a line by itself. For example, the line
.RS
.RS
.LP
.na
.nf
.B "\fCAC {\[dq]Name\[dq]:\[dq]Fred\[dq],\[dq]ObjID\[dq]:\[dq]PC123\[dq],\[dq]Color\[dq]:\[dq]red\[dq]}\fR"
.fi
.ad
.RE
.LP
could also be written in the file as:
.na
.nf
.RS
.LP
.ft C
AC {
\ \ \ \[dq]Name\[dq]: \[dq]Fred\[dq],
\ \ \ \[dq]ObjID\[dq]: \[dq]PC123\[dq],
\ \ \ \[dq]Color\[dq]: \[dq]red\[dq]
}
.ft
.fi
.ad
.RE
.LP
Commands which are only sent by clients to the server may not appear in this file.
Note that the protocol recommends that only comments should be sent before authentication,
and even so only
comments,
.BR AC ,
.BR DSM ,
.BR UPDATES ,
and
.B WORLD
commands are allowed to be sent before the server's
.B READY
command.
.LP
The original version of the server only read this file at start-up, repeating its
contents from memory to all clients; this version reads the file every time a client
connects, allowing changes to be made to the initialization file which take effect
immediately.
.LP
The following special commands may appear in this file. These are not sent to
the clients directly, but trigger other setup events in the server itself:
'\" <<desc>>
.TP 15
.B AUTH
If this command appears in the initialization file, only the contents up to
that line are sent before a client successfully authenticates to the server.
After authentication is complete, the remainder of the initialization file
will be sent to the client. 
There is no JSON data following this command.
.TP
.B READY
If this command appears in the initialization file, this indicates that the server's
.B READY
command should be sent to the client at this point. This allows the initialization file
to specify arbitrary server commands automatically beyond the limited set allowed before
the 
.B READY
command is sent. If this does not appear in the file, the server will automatically send
.B READY
when the client is fully signed-on and it is ready to communicate with the client normally.
There is no JSON data following this command.
.TP
.B SYNC
Enables sync-on-connect mode. With this set, the server will automatically perform the
effects of a 
.B SYNC
command for each client as it connects (after authentication if that is required).
There is no JSON data following this command.
.LP
The server commands
.BR CONN ,
.BR DENIED ,
.BR GRANTED ,
.BR OK ,
.BR PRIV ,
and
.B PROTOCOL
may never appear in this file.
.RE
'\" <</>>
.TP
.BI "\-log\-file " log-file
Append a record of server actions and diagnostic messages to the specified file.
By default, this is sent to the standard error device, as is the case if
.I log-file
is explicitly given the value 
.RB \*(lq \- \*(rq
(single hyphen). If
.I log-file
is the empty string, no log information is produced at all.
.RS
.LP
The
.I log-file
string may include a number of special tokens which are replaced with dynamic
values at runtime. These include:
.TS
center;
cfC l cfC l.
%A	full weekday	%p	AM or PM
%a	abbreviated weekday	%R	=\fC%H:%M\fR
%B	full month	%r	=\fC%I:%M:%S %p\fR
%b	abbreviated month	%S	second as 00\-60
%C	year 00\-99	%s	UNIX timestamp as integer
%c	time and date	%T	=\fC%H:%M:%S\fR
%d	date as 01\-31	%U	week as 00\-53 (Sun start)
%e	date as (sp)1\-31	%u	weekday 1=Mon, 7=Sun
%F	=\fC%Y-%m-%d\fR	%V	week as 00\-53 (Mon start)
%H	hour 00\-23	%v	=\fC%e-%b-%Y\fR
%h	=\fC%b\fR	%W	week as 00\-53 (Mon start)
%I	hour as 01\-12	%w	weekday 0=Sun, 6=Sat
%j	day of year as 001\-366	%X	time
%k	hour as (sp)0\-23	%Y	full year
%L	milliseconds as 000\-999	%y	two-digit year
%l	hour as (sp)1\-12	%Z	time zone name
%M	minute as 00\-59	%z	time zone offset
%m	month as 01\-12	%\[mc]	microseconds as 000\-999
%P	process ID	%%	literal \fC%\fR character
.TE
.RE
.TP
.BI "\-password\-file " pass-file
If this option is given, the server will require clients to authenticate with a
valid password. The first line of
.I pass-file
is the shared password expected to be used by all players. If a second line
is present, it provides a GM password which will grant GM privileges to a user
authenticating using it.
.RS
.LP
Subsequent lines, if any, give specific passwords for individual users. These have the
form
.RS
.IB username : password
.RE
Any login for the given 
.I username
must use the individual password for that user to successfully authenticate to the server.
Any
.I username
not listed in the password file (other than
.RB \*(lq gm \*(rq)
will successfully authenticate if the general-use shared password (the first line of
the password file) is given.
.RE
.TP
.BI "\-endpoint " \fR[\fPhost\fR]\fP\fB:\fP port
The service will accept incoming connections on the specified TCP port. The default is \*(lq:2323\*(rq.
.TP
.BI "\-save\-interval " interval
If the
'\" .B \-mysql
'\" or
.B \-sqlite
option is given, this sets the frequency at which the game state is saved
to the database.
The
.I interval
value is a number followed by a unit, or a number of these together in one string
(units are
.RB \*(lq h \*(rq
for hours,
.RB \*(lq m \*(rq
for minutes,
.RB \*(lq s \*(rq
for seconds,
.RB \*(lq ms \*(rq
for milliseconds,
.RB \*(lq us \*(rq
or
.RB \*(lq \[mc]s \*(rq
for microseconds,
and
.RB \*(lq ns \*(rq
for nanoseconds)
such as 
.RB \*(lq 10m30s \*(rq.
The default is 
.RB \*(lq 10m \*(rq
meaning every 10 minutes. 
.TP
.BI "\-sqlite " path
Open the sqlite3 database 
.I path
as the persistent record of game state and history. Any saved game state is read in from
this database when the service starts, allowing the game to continue from where it was
when the server was stopped. The service will periodically save its current state to this
database.
'\" .TP
'\" .BI "\-mysql " database
'\" Analogous to the
'\" .B \-sqlite
'\" option, this uses a MySQL database for persistent storage. 
'\" <</ital-is-var>>
'\" .I "This is not currently implemented."
'\" <<ital-is-var>>
'\" <</>>
.SH SECURITY
.LP
'\" <</bold-is-fixed>>
.B "The authentication system employed here is simplisitic and not sufficient for general application security,"
but for the sake of inconveniencing cheating at our little game
amongst friends, it will suffice for our narrowly-defined purposes where the stakes
are negligibly low.
'\" <<bold-is-fixed>>
.LP
It is intended just to discourage cheating at the game by looking
at spoilers or direct messages intended for other users, not for any more rigorous
protection.
.LP
The main weakness of the system is that passwords are stored in plaintext on the
server, which means it is critical to secure the password file and the system itself.
Caution your players to use a password for the mapper that is different from any other
passwords they use (which should be the password practice people observe anyway). A
breach that reveals passwords from the server's file would then only allow an imposter
to log in to your map service, which admittedly is more of an inconvenience than a serious security issue, assuming you use your map server just for playing a game and not for
the communication of any sensitive information. 
.LP
Don't use the GMA mapper server for the communication of sensitive information. It's
part of a game. Just play a game with it.
.SH "SIGNALS"
.LP
The map service responds to the following signals while running.
Note that this is different from the behavior of the original
server.
'\" <<desc>>
.TP 8
.B HUP
This signal causes the server to save state if needed and shut down gracefully.
No new connections will be accepted, but the server will wait for existing ones
to terminate before shutting down.
.TP
.B INT
Emergency shutdown. Just like the graceful shutdown caused by a HUP signal,
but forces all existing connections to immediately terminate.
.TP
.B USR1
This signal causes the server to dump a human-readable description of the current game state
on its standard output.
.TP
.B USR2
This signal causes the server to save its current state if needed.
'\" <</>>
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.LP
.BR gma (6),
.BR mapper (5),
.BR mapper (6),
.BR mapservice (6).
.SH AUTHOR
.LP
Steve Willoughby / steve@madscience.zone.
.SH BUGS
.SH COPYRGHT
Part of the GMA software suite, copyright \(co 1992\-2021 by Steven L. Willoughby (MadScienceZone), Aloha, Oregon, USA. All Rights Reserved. Distributed under BSD-3-Clause License. \"@m(c)@
